I'm excited about it. Today is October the 16th,
1987. I'm visiting with Dr. James F. McNamara, who
has been at Texas A&M since 1976 and is a professor
of educational psychology and educational
administration. Dr. McNamara is going to share
some of his perceptions since his arrival at the
College of Education about the changes and his
visions of the future possibly and as well as what
is happening in the college right now and how
impact, how change has impacted the College of
Education and its goals and so forth and how it has
changed as you arrived. Yeah. Let me make one
correction for you on coming to Texas A&M. I've
been here twice. I came to Texas A&M in September
1973 from the Advanced Study Center at the
University of Oregon and stayed two years, sold
everything I owned here, packed up all my baggage
and went to Columbia University, never to see
Texas A&M again. One year later, I was back at Texas
A&M and have been here since September 76.
What's I think most important in that is that I came
back for just one reason, to work with Dean Frank W.
R. Huber. That man had vision for the college and he
knew the first laws of change. that one needs to
build a fiscally sound enterprise before one goes
into all the ideas and nuances that would really
put a college on the map. The real specific of that
is this. We have today the benefits of Frank W.R.
Huber, who funded almost everyone in the early
years of the college on a 12-month appointment. We
are probably the only college in the United States
that has the largest percentage of its tenure
track professors on 12, not nine months,
appointments. And that was done in the very early
years of the college with a whole lot of insight
that the real first instrument for change is
financial.
If I looked at it and looked at both of the deans that
we had, I'd have to say that Frank W.R. Hubert built
a fiscally sound college. He did it without
federal money, without state money, or without
special state funding. He did it all on money that
accrued to the operating budget of the college,
and we still What is that money? You're talking
about non-soft money. Yeah. His idea was that you
don't build a permanent college of education with
soft money. Soft money underwrites some ideas,
but you really build a college with hard money. And
it's like fixed and variable expenditures. He
just thought that we needed a fixed expenditure
for the college. And college budgets are very
labor intensive, and they require an enormous
amount of money. Hubert got that. The second thing
I think that's important with Hubert, and then I'd
like to say just a little bit about the next theme.
Hubert handpicked
almost every faculty member who came to A&M in the
formative years.
Do you think he had a special something that he
looked for in those people? Oh, absolutely. Do you
see something that was across? What is that? I
think Hubert had what he called the post-hole
theory. It was you invest special monies for
change in individuals who are entrepreneurial
and thinking and real agents for change, but able
to venture. A good example of a person that Hubert
Post told in the early days came about the same time
I did, is Bill Nash. The whole gifted and talented
movement was a personal investment in people such
as Bill Nash. Bill was not a researcher. Bill was a
program developer. He had another job offer at the
University of Chicago, but came to Texas A&M. He
was, at the time he came here, on a one-year
appointment at Texas Southern University
working with minorities and tried to advantage
their opportunities for schooling.
I think the characteristics of Bill, and
particularly his interest there, his
programmability, his commitment to working with
minorities, and last, but I would say most
important, his brand name. institution, the
University of Georgia. It's one of the key
colleges of education in the United States that
deals with creativity and assessment measures of
creativity. Bill had all those research skills.
Earlier in the college days, the dean tried to
pollinate by picking up Hal Hawkins from Harvard,
Bob Schutz from Stanford, and he was director of
the lab school at Stanford. He picked up Glenn
Johnson, who was a graduate from Teachers
College. And in the 11th hour, 2300 for the
military types, every one of these people were
good researchers, but with a specific vision and a
fairly clear-cut idea of where they wanted to be in
the college.
Mike Ash was recruited, now the department head of
Ed Psych, to get child development in those areas
leveraged. I came in educational administration
to get research going in administration. This is
nuanced, but it's probably important when you
listen to the tape and you go back. I can tell you
real quick, in about a minute or two, how I ended up
at Texas A&M. And it really all states Hubert's
radar to find people with certain
characteristics.
I had never heard of Texas A&M, but they were
looking for a person to head up the planning,
research, and evaluation efforts here in the
college. And they had a job description for a full
professor. I sat down and wrote one afternoon at
the Advanced Studies Center five pages about what
I thought planning, research, and evaluation
should be in a college of education, sent it to
Texas A&M, and with only three years out of
graduate school, asking for a full
professorship.
Hubert hired me, never interviewed anyone else
for the job, asked me to come and think on my feet in a
seminar for the faculty without any presentation
or forewarning. Two years after I came to Texas
A&M, I found out that the reason why I was brought to
Texas A&M was one, the reasons were, one, because
of the letter and the vision, but two, the
verification. His cousin was a professor of
educational administration at the University of
Kansas, or Kansas State. And when my letter
arrived with Hubert, he called his cousin, And his
cousin told him what my skills were, what I was
doing at the Advanced Study Center, and that I was
probably one of the largest possible outliers
that could exist in any event. Because 75 of my 90
hours in graduate preparation were all
mathematics. And that my three-year history was
in research, both theoretical and empirical. And
he had checked through that far. long before he had
me here on the campus. It was on the strength of that
that he canceled the search. But my example for
your tape is that the man spent an enormous amount
of effort locating profs. If you look at the
demography of that, the profs that he hired are
still here. By and large, 90% of the people that
were hired Between 1969 and 1976, when I came back
to Texas A&M, are still here. They're
individually productive. They not only wear a
department hat, they wear a college hat. And they
sell their soul to the college, to its
advancement. They're personally renowned and
recognized in their own fields. The man just had an
ingenious sense. Thank you. So not only did he
develop a fiscally sound college, but in the
process of doing that, he found the people. That's
what makes the college, is the people. And when I
came to Texas A&M, the first two years I was here,
from this post-hoeing theory I gave you, he gave me
$17,000 of unconverted money to use as I saw fit to
advance research in college. And long before some
of the superstars like Vic Wilson, Gwyneth Badu,
and Cecil Reynolds from our department, he was
already investing in a couple of people. Bill Nash
is an example. John Denton and I, in 1979, were
given a whole summer off to do anything we wanted to
do that we thought was important to influence the
future development of research in the college. I
took the whole summer off on full pay and went to the
University of Michigan as a visiting scholar and
learned survey research. John went over to the
Texas R&D Center in Austin. Three years later,
John was back here and was president of the Texas
Association of Plain Evaluation Research. And
ever since that time, he's leveraged the
advantage for research in the Southwest region
for Texas A&M. So then the mission of the teaching,
research, and service, which is what the mission
of the college is now, was very much in place at the
time. It actually started when the college
started. And has the emphasis shifted any from
teaching, research, and service? Yeah, yeah. I
would say that there's been a real growing
emphasis on research. Here's my model. When I came
here, I shared with Hubert that I thought it took 25
years to build a college of education of the
stature of a Stanford, a Harvard, an Illinois, a
Wisconsin, a Minnesota. Are we going to get there?
Yeah, we're pretty close. I said there were really
three phases, and each of them had about a 10-year
cycle. But over a quarter of a century, that means
some of those are overlapping, if you can
visualize what I'm saying. You can just put these
three 10-year bars. The first part of the plan to
build a college is to have service. And Hubert did
that. The next thing... Well, I'm sorry, I really
think the first piece of it is teaching. I'm sorry,
I didn't... And Hubert hired people who could
really teach in graduate professional
education. And so the first ten years were really
devoted to teaching. Research was done off the end
of the bench, so its weight was pretty small. About
seven or eight years down that 25-year cycle, he
started to do some service work. In the process of
thinking of service, they started to think about
evaluation designs, technical assistance. And
these things became the fodder and the lubricants
that started the third cycle, which would be
research. So if you go back and look at the
transactions of the college, you can use the model
I just gave you, and you can see that 20 years later,
all three of those things are in place. Teaching is
pretty well anchored. Services growing even now
with the school university collaborative some of
your service activity that be linked to the
minority recruitment The whole gifted and
talented program service area the special ed
service areas A lot of the service is pretty well
anchored and it's gearing to research Now the
research is almost in place and what we're finding
is a lot of the theoretical research we work on is
not research that came from the ideas of
individuals, but rather are coming out of this
joint collaborative college mission. Victor
Wilson's a good example. Vic started to work with
the computer program and the gifted and talented
and working with very young youth. This is a
professor? Yeah, Vic Wilson's a fellow in
extracurricular and he's one of our
statisticians. Vic is probably the, he's one of
the top three researchers of the college. But Vic
started to work with the service activities of the
Gifted and Talented Program. And from that now,
they're doing some very theoretical research
relating to measurement, which will detect in
early stages, in early youth, genius. Pat
Alexander's involved in that. Now, it's so
naturally confounded with these service things,
the second or the third stage, that you never know
it. Tell me who the three top researchers are
considered in the college. I know you're one of
them. That's a tough one. That's a really tough
one. Well,
there's a lot. I say that Vic's top because Vic...
is as theoretical as any researcher in the
college. And he's also as practical as any
researcher in the college. His portfolio of
insights and skills are just as valuable
theoretically as they are empirically. If you ask
me for the top three, there are a couple in the
college who are very good theoretically. have no
interest in collaborative research in the field.
They are sort of what they call in mathematics and
science is pioneering. They're doing the
frontier research. Well, I think you will be my
only source, or my best source, on the researching
part of the college. So I would give you those
insights. I would say, if you would have asked me
this question in 1978, or even ask Hubert, Hubert
would have said John Denton and Jim McNamara. And
those were the two that he invested in. Since that
time, I'd like to say that there are about five or
six that I would put in an orbit and not rank order.
And that would be Victor Wilson, John Denton,
Gwyneth Padoo, Cecil Reynolds, Ernie Goetz, and
Jim McNamara. Now, notice that the largest
concentration of those researchers is at Ed
Psych. So if you really want to follow the research
transactions of the college, the premier push
came out of Ed Psych. Now, that was one of the most, I
wouldn't say devastating, but defeating notions
for Hubert. Because Frank Hubert wanted the
educational administration department in this
college to be premier. All his training was in
administration, both educational and public
administration, and in history and governance.
And originally, he thought that the ed admin
department here would be just an outstanding
research department. I would say it's a very good
service department, the principal center being a
good example. Of some of the recent, yeah. And
another really superior example would be the
almost $2 million that were invested in the
community education center. None of that money,
incidentally, was ever sidetracked, like
corporations would do with about 5% of their
working capital put in R&D. That never happened in
the Mott Foundation efforts. but a tremendous
service effort. The premier research
department, I'll say it again, it's like he didn't
expect that originally. If you move on now, and
then I'll come back and take any specific
questions you want. When Corrigan came to the
college, Corrigan inherited a fiscally sound
college. And I would go so far as to say, in terms of
faculty morale and underwriting, financial
underwriting, the best and the most visibly sound
college in Asia, given all those full-time
employment, 12-month contracts. He also
inherited an enormous amount of talent. His
leadership style was so dramatically different
than Corrigan's that people started to rise to the
occasion. He had the little near mnemonic which
said, sharing, daring, and caring. And his
objective, I think, which was embedded in all that
rhetoric, was to make, to create two colleges.
A formal college where people reside,
departments, and where they get their money. And
then what I would call the idea college, And the
idea college was the inquiry groups. So inquiry
groups are like departments, but they're
adhocracies in Toffler's sense, rather than
formal departments. Are they still very active? I
mean, I know he initiated, but have they
maintained that momentum? I would suggest that
you couldn't put your finger on the inquiry groups
as they were established. That was my meaning in
the autocracies. What Corrigan wanted to do was to
bring researchers with common interests
together, quite independent of the departments,
and to get them speaking with each other. and
getting to undertake some common endeavors. And
did that happen? Oh, yeah. That happened. And it
was a very, very effective strategy. But I don't
think the inquiry group orientation needed to be
long-lasting. It was more a development of a
kinship, a professional kinship. Hi. Hi, Ann.
Yeah, I'm right in the middle of an interview. OK,
can I come back later? Yeah, about 3.30, I'll be
around.
No, those things are not very active for my money,
but what people have done is come together and are
working on common things. Is that a collaborative
effort within departments or with other
colleges? I think to even link it to departments is
really counterproductive to what the inquiry
groups accomplished. It brought people together
with people. That's what I meant by the kinship.
But not necessarily even... people within, or are
they all in the college? Are they working with
other people? Oh, yeah. No, they're
predominantly in the college. And I would say that
several of the department heads in the college
systematically resisted the whole notion of
inquiry because it made information and
scholarly productivity and activity valuable in
its own right. Did it conflict with their
philosophy? Did each department have a very
distinct philosophy that conflicted with that?
Or was the philosophy the same, but just the way
they went about doing things? Oh, I think entirely
different. Each department? Entirely
different. I would say that Ed Psych, for example,
just wanted to work with inquiry in every way they
could. And you'll find its faculty were in every
inquiry group. On the other hand, I can tell you two
departments that almost penalized faculty for
joining inquiry groups. Now, I would say that's
the difference in philosophy.
That's interesting. And when you turn the tape
recorder off, I'll tell you the departments. But
I'll tell you where you can get that information
and answer that question in a really neat way. Dave
Erlandson did a study on that. And what you find is I
think there are four different, a couple of
different profiles. And there are even a couple of
different types of inquiry groups that were
designated and emerging. I chaired one of the
designated inquiry groups that led to this
whole computer idea in the college. It was called
the Inquiry Group on Research Assistance in
Computer Technology. And that stayed together
for about four years. And we were very
instrumental outside of the department
structure in recommending how money got spent for
computers. And in some cases, the faculty were
much more likely than departments to pool their
resources when they needed big things.
Departments compete. Inquiry group members
pool. It's a nice contrast. And the dean sort of
sanctioned that. He just sort of fanned the fumes,
the flames, and worked that. And it really upset
some of the department heads. Well, because it was
so, I mean, it had not been done before, and it was
just such a drastic change, like you said. And
that's unique to this dean. And that's why I'm
looking at this study as two distinct eras, with
the interim year with Dr. Limbacher. But it was
definitely a Hubert era, and there is now a
Corrigan era, and they each are unique in their
own. Well, I would say Corrigan's success was
pretty well, could be predicted from the legacy
that was left to him. Mm-hmm. from prior
administration. I mean, not only that Chancellor
Hubert, but the endorsement of the university.
OK. Now, from going from administration to the
student body, and we're hearing a lot now about the
standards at A&M and how it's affecting the
students that we get now. It has grown
tremendously, even since you've been here. What
do you see as far as, has it affected the way you get
to work with students now that there's so many more
students and now that they're coming in? with much
higher standards are getting higher and higher.
Are we weeding out people that really need to be in
this college? Do you think the standards are
higher? For graduate instruction? Now than they
were 10 years ago? Because I don't think that's
true. No, I guess I'm going more with the fact that
the standards for admission are now going up
higher. Graduate admission? No, undergraduate.
No, graduate is not. That's right. You are
strictly... Last year was the first time I taught a
graduate course at Texas A&M, and I worked with
some of the math scholar students, undergraduate
math scholar, and will continue to work with them.
That was the first undergraduate? First
undergraduate course. I'm in two departments,
neither one of which has an undergraduate
program.
But I would say that there are only a couple of
occasions that I'd point to where the graduate
admissions standards are tougher now. And
there's one very obvious case in the college.
That's Ed Psych Counseling Program.
person that they select on an annual basis for a
four-year residency to complete a degree, there
are seven to eight people standing in line waiting
for that position. I don't know if you know that
they're that good.
Fantastic. Another case where the enrollment
standards have jumped astronomically is in
school psych. I mean, the quality of students,
school psych. And that's a new program. Now, both
of those are APA approved. In universities, there
are four types of APA programs, clinical, school
and counseling, and industrial psych. Those are
the only four basic. We have two of the four in this
department. And some of the most recent ratings on
both counseling and school psych say we're up
there running with the best in the country. Now,
those things have really changed the type of
students that I've worked with. I find that these
students, although they come originally without
a large predilection and appetite for research,
very quickly shift gears. So that was something
that you mentioned earlier, too, about the fact
that how we are perceived by other universities
and outside this college. So you've answered it a
couple of times now by what you're talking about
the students and then also what you referenced
before about the fact that we're almost there with
these goals that you that you kind of projected
back 25 or 20 years ago or 18 years ago? I'd say we're
almost there, but I can tell you some things that
are really dragging weight on making this a
research university. What's that? I'd say it's
the Ed Admin Department. The what? The Ed Admin
Department. I think the Ed Admin Department is
still in a service mode in terms of students. In
fact, I think there are over 200 students who are
just sort of, don't quote me on this, But there's a
large number of students, I've heard the number
200, who are not degree students but are
certification students. Now, these folks are
shopping around. They shop for courses. They'll
take anything we offer in San Antonio, if they're
from San Antonio, and then work it to a degree, to a
certification plan. They'll take what they can
get here. But by and large, they're not degree
students.
So do you see that as a holding back? If the
objective is to become a major research
university. I'm not saying that's just... And is
it? Is that the objective? That was Dean Corrigan.
I mean, he mentioned that in his initial... I would
say any time the rhetoric leaves the college and
moves towards the university, that you're going
to get that said. Mm-hmm. Sure. I think Corrigan's
idea, if he speaks to central administration,
he's got to get on the same wavelength, in the same
orbit that the university's in. So the rhetoric
that way is going to go. It'll go. I would think that
the rhetoric in a college, at least some of
Corrigan's rhetoric, would suggest that there's
an effort to create one profession, and that
people in the schools and people in the university
ought to be more formally linked. that they're in a
profession. And what the college should be having
as its objective is the betterment of the
profession. And the betterment of the
profession, if you follow its logic, can't be any
better than the quality of what we do for students
in any kind of academic environment. But I've
heard that rhetoric. And that's not directly
influenced by research. The connection between
research and the day-to-day world of schools is
much more immediate than immediate. I think we
cheat a little bit on that one, to call it college
research. But I still don't think we're in the full
third phase of what it takes in the first quarter
century to make an orange university. But we're
getting there. And is there a search out there for
people that will help to get there, to help us to get
there? I mean, is there an active search for kinds
of people that are interested in those kinds of
areas where it will? I'd say that efforts in the
Development Council our efforts to try and find
more resources and more opportunity and more
advocacy for the research, for the research
members of the college. And for the service, but
for the research, yeah. I see that as a useful
transaction. I think the school-university
collaborative research that we've started is
probably one of the most exciting things that has
come down the pike. And I think it... Sorry I didn't
make it to that meeting, but I do want to keep in
touch with that. I do think that that's going to
have a dramatic impact in the next three years in
the college. I think it might replace some of the
activities of inquiry group.
What are some of the highlights, looking back now,
in the past and in the present, I'm interested in
what you feel have been your greatest
contributions, which obviously are in the
research field, but maybe a couple of insights or
observations that you have, and you shared some
really neat ones today, that as somebody looks at
this maybe 20 or 30 years from now and looks at Yeah,
here's some tangents that you probably wouldn't
get elsewhere. Okay, that's what I want. When we
had the search for Dean Carter, it was... Hold on,
let me transfer the...